[`RWKV`] add RWKV blogpost (#1076)
huggingface/blog: rwkv.md

---
title: "Introducing RWKV - An RNN with the advantages of a transformer" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/142_rwkv/rwkv_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: BLinkDL
- user: Hazzzardous
- user: sgugger
- user: RWKV
---

# Introducing RWKV - An RNN with the advantages of a transformer

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: The title of the post is "Introducing...", and then the first header is "Introduction". It's a bit repetitive, and maybe it's safe to drop this first header?

Author: Yes sure!

ChatGPT and chatbot-powered applications have taken over the recent AI hype around Natural Language Processing (NLP) models (i.e. text models). The community is constantly seeking strong, reliable and open-source models for their applications and use cases. 

> The emergence of these powerful models is a logical after of the democratization of transformer-based models, firstly introduced in 2017 by [Vaswani et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762), that has drastically outperformed previous SoTA models for NLP tasks, based on Recurrent Neural Networks, (RNNs), that the scientific community believed were dead after that paper. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The emergence of these powerful models is a logical consequence of the democratization of transformer-based models, firstly introduced in 2017 by [Vaswani et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762), that has drastically outperformed previous SoTA models for NLP tasks, based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), that the scientific community believed were dead after that paper. 
```
Not sure about "after" -> "consequence", but the latter is more readable to me :)

Author: Thanks for the suggestion!

Through this blogpost, we will introduce the integration of a new architecture, RWKV, that combines the advantages of both RNNs and transformers, and that has been recently integrated into the HuggingFace [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) library.

### Overview of the RWKV project

> The RWKV project has been kicked-off and led by [Bo Peng](https://github.com/BlinkDL), who is actively contributing and maintaining the project. There is a community that is constantly enhancing the project’s artifacts in the official discord channel on various topics such as performance (RWKV.cpp, quantization, etc.), scalability (dataset processing & scrapping) and research (chat-fine tuning, multi-modal finetuning, etc.). The GPU access for training RWKV models are donated by Stability AI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RWKV project has been kicked off and led by [Bo Peng](https://github.com/BlinkDL), who is actively contributing and maintaining the project. There is a community that is constantly enhancing the project’s artifacts in the official discord channel on various topics such as performance (RWKV.cpp, quantization, etc.), scalability (dataset processing & scrapping) and research (chat-fine tuning, multi-modal finetuning, etc.). The GPU access for training RWKV models are donated by Stability AI.
```

Learn more about that by joining the [official discord channel](https://discordapp.com/users/468093332535640064) and learn more about the general ideas behind RWKV in these two blogposts: https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html / https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html 

> ### transformer architecture vs RNNs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Transformer Architecture vs RNNs
```

> The RNN architecture is one of the first widely used Neural Network architectures for processing a sequence of data, contrary to classic architectures that take a fixed size input. It takes as input the current “token” (i.e. current data point of the datastream), the previous “state”, and computes the predicted next token, as well as the predicted next state. The new state is then used to compute the prediction of the next token, and so on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The RNN architecture is one of the first widely used Neural Network architectures for processing a sequence of data, contrary to classic architectures that take a fixed size input. It takes as input the current “token” (i.e. current data point of the datastream), the previous “state”, and computes the predicted next token, and the predicted next state. The new state is then used to compute the prediction of the next token, and so on.
```
Readability nit :) also as far as I remember new state is also used in predicting next state but feel free to correct me if I'm wrong (I need to brush up :D)

Author: Ah yes you are right!

> A RNN can be also used in different “modes”, therefore enabling the possibility of applying RNNs on different scenarios, as denoted by [Andrej Karpathy’s blogpost](https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A RNN can be also used in different “modes”, therefore enabling the possibility of applying RNNs on different scenarios, as denoted in [this blog post](https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/).
```
different scenarios such as?

Reviewer: I think it's better to leave it as [Andrej Karpathy’s blogpost] to indicate that the reader will be led to a different blog, and to give appropriate attribution.

Reviewer: +1 to giving some example of scenarios

Author: Added more examples! There should be some examples on the caption of the figure as well

| ![rnn_diagram](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RNN-scheme.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>Overview of possible configurations of using RNNs. Source: <a href="https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >Andrej Karpathy's blogpost</a>  </b>|

> As the same weights are used to compute the predictions at each step, RNNs naturally lack for memorizing information for long-range sequences - due to vanishing gradient issue. Some attempts have been made to mitigate this, by introducing new architectures such as LSTMs or GRUs, but the architecture that has been proved to be the most powerful so far is the transformer architecture.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the same weights are used to compute the predictions at each step, RNNs naturally lack for memorizing information for long-range sequences - due to vanishing gradient issue. Some attempts have been made to mitigate this, by introducing new architectures such as LSTMs or GRUs, but the transformer architecture is proven to be the most powerful one. 
```
Avoiding passive voice helps with readability

Reviewer: An alternative: 
"Because RNNs use the same weights to compute predictions at every step, they struggle to memorize information for long-range sequences due to the vanishing gradient issue. Efforts have been made to address this limitation by introducing new architectures such as LSTMs or GRUs. However, the transformer architecture proved to be the most effective thus far in resolving this issue."

Author: Thanks for the suggestions! Added @MKhalusova 's suggestion :-)

> In the transformer architecture, the input tokens are processed in the self-attention module simultaneously due to the design of that module. The tokens are first linearly projected into different spaces using the query, key and value weights - then the resulting matrices are directly used to compute the attention scores (softmax term below), then multiplied by the value hidden states to obtain the final hidden states. This design enables the architecture to effectively mitigate the long-range sequence issue, and also perform faster inference and training compared to RNN models. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the transformer architecture, the input tokens are processed in the self-attention module simultaneously. The tokens are first linearly projected into different spaces using the query, key and value weights. The resulting matrices are directly used to compute the attention scores (through softmax, as shown below), then multiplied by the value hidden states to obtain the final hidden states. This design enables the architecture to effectively mitigate the long-range sequence issue, and also perform faster inference and training compared to RNN models. 
```

Reviewer 3: Long sentences are often hard to read :')

| ![transformer_diagram](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/transformer-scheme.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>Formulation of attention scores in transformer models. Source: <a href="https://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >Jay Alammar's blogpost</a>  </b>|

| ![rwkv_attention_formula](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV-formula.png)|
|:--:|
| <b>Formulation of attention scores in RWKV models. Source: <a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/main/RWKV-formula.png" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >RWKV blogpost</a>  </b>|

During training, Transformer architecture has several advantages over traditional RNNs and CNNs. One of the most significant advantages is its ability to learn contextual representations. Unlike the RNNs and CNNs, which process input sequences one word at a time, Transformer architecture processes input sequences as a whole. This allows it to capture long-range dependencies between words in the sequence, which is particularly useful for tasks such as language translation and question answering.

> During inference, RNNs have some advantages in speed and memory efficiency. These advantages include simplicity, due to needing only matrix-vector operations, and memory efficiency, as the memory requirements do not grow during inference. Furthermore, due to computations only acting on the current token and state, the computation speed does not decrease with context window length.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During inference, RNNs have some advantages in speed and memory efficiency. These advantages include simplicity, due to needing only matrix-vector operations, and memory efficiency, as the memory requirements do not grow during inference. Furthermore, the computation speed remains the same with context window length due to how computations only act on the current token and the state.
```
Negative voice undermines readibility

## The RWKV architecture

> RWKV is inspired by [Apple’s Attention Free Transformer](https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/attention-free-transformer). The architecture has been carefully simplified and optimized such that it can be transformed into an RNN. In addition, a number of tricks has been added (Without which the model won’t be performant) such as TokenShift & SmallInitEmb (the list of tricks is listed in [this link](https://github.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/blob/main/README.md#how-it-works)) to boost its performance to match GPT. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RWKV is inspired by [Apple’s Attention Free Transformer](https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/attention-free-transformer). The architecture has been carefully simplified and optimized such that it can be transformed into an RNN. In addition, a number of tricks has been added such as `TokenShift` & `SmallInitEmb` (the list of tricks is listed in [this link](https://github.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/blob/main/README.md#how-it-works)) to boost its performance to match GPT. Without these, the model wouldn't be as performant.
```

Author: Thanks! should be added

> For training, there is an infrastructure to scale the training up to 14B parameters as of now, and some issues have been iteratively fixedn such as numerical instability (fixed in RWKV-4, the newest version of RWKV as of today).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For training, there is an infrastructure to scale the training up to 14B parameters as of now, and some issues have been iteratively fixed in RWKV-4 (latest version as of today), such as numerical instability.
```

### RWKV as a combination of RNNs and transformers

> How to combine the best from transformers and RNNs? The main drawback of transformer-based models is that it can become challenging to run a model with a context window that is larger than a certain value, as the attention scores are computed simultaneously for the entire sequence. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How to combine the best of transformers and RNNs? The main drawback of transformer-based models is that it can become challenging to run a model with a context window that is larger than a certain value, as the attention scores are computed simultaneously for the entire sequence. 
```

> RNNs natively supports very long context lengths - only limited by the context length seen in training, but this can be extended to millions of tokens with careful coding. Currently there are RWKV models trained on a context length of 8192 (`ctx8192`) and they are as fast as `ctx1024` models and consume same amt of VRAM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RNNs natively support very long context lengths - only limited by the context length seen in training, but this can be extended to millions of tokens with careful coding. Currently, there are RWKV models trained on a context length of 8192 (`ctx8192`) and they are as fast as `ctx1024` models and consume the same amount of VRAM.
```
nits

The major drawbacks of traditional RNN models and how RWKV is different:

> 1- Traditional RNN models are unable to utilize very long context (LSTM can only manage ~100 tokens when used as a LM, as shown in some paper). However RWKV can utilize thousands of tokens and beyond, as shown below: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Traditional RNN models are unable to utilize very long contexts (LSTM can only manage ~100 tokens when used as a LM). However, RWKV can utilize thousands of tokens and beyond, as shown below: 
```

| ![rwkv_loss](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV-loss.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>LM loss with respect to different context lengths and model sizes. Source: <a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/main/RWKV-ctxlen.png" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >RWKV original repository</a>  </b>|

> 2- Traditional RNN models cannot be parallelized when training. RWKV is similar to a “linearized GPT” and it trains faster than GPT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Traditional RNN models cannot be parallelized when training. RWKV is similar to a “linearized GPT” and it trains faster than GPT.
```
GPT as in, a causal LM? people even think of a brand when they see GPT these days :D

By combining both these advantages into a single architecture, the hope is that RWKV can grow to become more than the sum of its parts.

### RWKV attention formulation

> The model architecture is totally similar to the classic transformer based models (i.e. an embedding layer, multiple identical layers, layer normalization, and a Language Modeling head to predict the next token). The only difference is on the attention layer, which is totally different from the traditional transformer-based models.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The model architecture is very similar to classic transformer-based models (i.e. an embedding layer, multiple identical layers, layer normalization, and a Causal Language Modeling head to predict the next token). The only difference is on the attention layer, which is completely different from the traditional transformer-based models.
```
Feel free to ignore if it's incorrect

> For more details, we suggest reader to deeply read the formulation of the attention layer that is explained in details in [this blogpost](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details, we suggest the reader to deeply read the formulation of the attention layer that is explained in detail in [this blog post](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html).
```

> For more details, we suggest reader to deeply read the formulation of the attention layer that is explained in details in [this blogpost](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html).

Reviewer: Alternative: 

To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the attention layer, we recommend to delve into the detailed explanation provided in [a blog post by Johan Sokrates Wind](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html).

### Existing checkpoints

#### Pure language models: RWKV-4 models

> Most adopted RWKV models range from ~170M parameters to 14B parameters. According to the RWKV overview blogpost: https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html these models have been trained on the Pile dataset and evaluated against other SoTA models on different benchmarks and seems to performing quite well, with very comparable results against them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most adopted RWKV models range from ~170M parameters to 14B parameters. According to the RWKV overview [blog post](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html), these models have been trained on the Pile dataset and evaluated against other SoTA models on different benchmarks, and they seem to perform quite well, with very comparable results against them.
```

> and seem to perform quite well, with very comparable results against them.
This causes a bit of ambiguity, can you separate this sentence?

| ![rwkv_loss](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV-eval.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>RWKV-4 compared to other common architectures. Source: <a href="https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >Johan Wind's blogpost</a>  </b>|

> #### Instruction fine-tuned / chat version: RWKV-4 raven

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Instruction Fine-tuned/Chat Version: RWKV-4 Raven
```

> Bo has also trained a “chat” version of the RWKV architecture, the rwkv-4-raven model, is a RWKV-4 pile model fine-tuned on  Alpaca, CodeAlpaca, Guanaco, GPT4All, ShareGPT and more. The model is available in multiple versions, with models trained on different languages (english only, english + chinese + japanese, english + japanese, etc.) and different sizes (1.5B parameters, 7B parameters, 14B parameters). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bo has also trained a “chat” version of the RWKV architecture, the RWKV-4 Raven model. It is a RWKV-4 pile model fine-tuned on ALPACA, CodeAlpaca, Guanaco, GPT4All, ShareGPT and more. The model is available in multiple versions, with models trained on different languages (English only, English + Chinese + Japanese, English + Japanese, etc.) and different sizes (1.5B parameters, 7B parameters, 14B parameters). 
```
RWKV pile as in it was pre-trained on The Pile? might worth clarifying :)

Author: Thanks! Added the clarification

> All these models are available on Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All these models are available on Hugging Face Hub.
```
Might be nice to leave a link if it's on a profile or organization

Reviewer: +1

> ## `transformers` integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 🤗 Transformers integration
```

> The architecture have been added into `transformers` library thanks to [this Pull Request](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/22797). At this time of writing, you can use the architecture by installing `transformers` from source, or by using the `main` branch of the library. The architecture is tightly integrated with the library, and you can use it as you would use any other architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture has been added to the `transformers` library thanks to [this Pull Request](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/22797). As of the time of writing, you can use it by installing `transformers` from source, or by using the `main` branch of the library. The architecture is tightly integrated with the library, and you can use it as you would any other architecture.
```

> Let us walk through some examples below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let us walk through some examples below.
```

> ### Text generation example

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Text Generation Example
```

To generate text given an input prompt, you can run the snippet below:

```python
import torch
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("RWKV/rwkv-4-169m-pile")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("RWKV/rwkv-4-169m-pile")

prompt = "\nIn a shocking finding, scientist discovered a herd of dragons living in a remote, previously unexplored valley, in Tibet. Even more surprising to the researchers was the fact that the dragons spoke perfect Chinese."

inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt")
output = model.generate(inputs["input_ids"], max_new_tokens=400, top_p=0.8, do_sample=True)
print(tokenizer.decode(output[0].tolist()))

> ```

Reviewer 3: Would be nice to post the output of this below

Author: Done!

> You can also use `pipeline` to generate text:

Reviewer: Maybe the pipeline example should be first, because it's simpler?

Author: Agreed!

```python
from transformers import pipeline

> model_id = "RWKV/rwkv-4-169m-pile"

Reviewer 3: I think you can define this above to avoid repetitiveness but feel free to ignore :)

pipe = pipeline("text-generation", model=model_id)
print(pipe(prompt, max_length=10))
```

### Use the raven models (chat models)

You can prompt the chat model in the alpaca style, here is an example below:

```python
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM, pipeline

model_id = "RWKV/rwkv-raven-1b5"

model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id).to(0)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)

question = "Tell me about ravens"
prompt = f"### Instruction: {question}\n### Response:"

inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt").to(0)
output = model.generate(inputs["input_ids"], max_new_tokens=100)

print(tokenizer.decode(output[0].tolist(), skip_special_tokens=True))
>>> ### Instruction: Tell me about ravens
### Response: RAVENS are a type of bird that is native to the Middle East and North Africa. They are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments. RAVENS are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments. They are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments.
```

> According to Bo, better instruction techniques are detailed in [this discord message](https://discord.com/channels/992359628979568762/1083107245971226685/1098533896355848283)

Reviewer: This link doesn't work for me for some reason. Possibly, it's on a discord server I'm not a member of? If so, maybe it's better to briefly list these techniques, or add a screenshot, or at least add a note that a reader needs to be logged into that Discord server

Author: There should be an instruction on how to join the channel on the line 24, I also added a "make sure to join the channel before clicking"

### Weights conversion

Any user could easily convert the original RWKV weights to the HF format by simply running the conversion script provided in `transformers` library. First, push the "raw" weights on the Hugging Face Hub (let's denote that repo as `RAW_HUB_REPO`, and the raw file `RAW_FILE`), then run the conversion script:

```bash
python convert_rwkv_checkpoint_to_hf.py --repo_id RAW_HUB_REPO --checkpoint_file RAW_FILE --output_dir OUTPUT_DIR
```

> If you want to push the converted model on the Hub (let's say under `dummy_user/converted-rwkv`), run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to push the converted model on the Hub (let's say, under `dummy_user/converted-rwkv`), run:
```

```bash
python convert_rwkv_checkpoint_to_hf.py --repo_id RAW_HUB_REPO --checkpoint_file RAW_FILE --output_dir OUTPUT_DIR --push_to_hub --model_name dummy_user/converted-rwkv
```

> Of course, don't forget to log in with `huggingface-cli login` before pushing the model.

Reviewer 3: Maybe do this step above? Feel free to ignore

Author: Done! Thanks!

## Future work

### Multi-lingual RWKV

> Bo is currently building a multilingual corpus to train RWKV models on. Recently a new multilingual tokenizer has been released as shown [here](https://twitter.com/BlinkDL_AI/status/1649839897208045573)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bo is currently working on a multilingual corpus to train RWKV models. Recently a new multilingual tokenizer has been released as shown [here](https://twitter.com/BlinkDL_AI/status/1649839897208045573).
```

> Bo is currently building a multilingual corpus to train RWKV models on. Recently a new multilingual tokenizer has been released as shown [here](https://twitter.com/BlinkDL_AI/status/1649839897208045573)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bo is currently building a multilingual corpus to train RWKV models on. Recently a new multilingual tokenizer [has been released](https://twitter.com/BlinkDL_AI/status/1649839897208045573)
```

### Community-oriented and research projects 

> The RWKV community is very active and working on several follow up directions, a list of cool projects can be find in a [dedicated channel on discord](https://discord.com/channels/992359628979568762/1068563033510653992). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The RWKV community is very active and working on several follow-up directions, a list of cool projects can be found in a [dedicated channel on discord](https://discord.com/channels/992359628979568762/1068563033510653992). 
```

> The RWKV community is very active and working on several follow up directions, a list of cool projects can be find in a [dedicated channel on discord](https://discord.com/channels/992359628979568762/1068563033510653992). 

Reviewer: Again, for some people the discord link won't work

Author: There should be an instruction on how to join the channel on the line 24, I also added a "make sure to join the channel before clicking"

> There is also a channel dedicated to research around this architecure, feel free to join and contribute!

Reviewer: Add a link to where one can join, please

Author: There should be an instruction on how to join the channel on the line 24

> ### Model compression and acceleration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Model Compression and Acceleration
```

Due to only needing matrix-vector operations, RWKV is an ideal candidate for non-standard and experimental computing hardware, such as photonic processors/accelerators.

> Therefore, the architecture can also naturally benefit from classic acceleration and compression techniques ([ONNX](https://github.com/harrisonvanderbyl/rwkv-onnx), 4-bit/8-bit quantization, etc.), and we hope this will be democratized for developers and practitioners together with the transformers integration of the architecture.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, the architecture can also naturally benefit from classic acceleration and compression techniques (such as [ONNX](https://github.com/harrisonvanderbyl/rwkv-onnx), 4-bit/8-bit quantization, etc.), and we hope this will be democratized for developers and practitioners together with the transformers integration of the architecture.
```

RWKV can also benefit from the acceleration techniques proposed by [`optimum`](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum) library in the near future.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Introducing RWKV - An RNN with the advantages of a transformer" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/142_rwkv/rwkv_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: BLinkDL
- user: Hazzzardous
- user: sgugger
- user: RWKV
---

# Introducing RWKV - An RNN with the advantages of a transformer

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

ChatGPT and chatbot-powered applications have captured significant attention in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) domain. The community is constantly seeking strong, reliable and open-source models for their applications and use cases. 

> The emergence of these powerful models is a logical consequence of the democratization of transformer-based models, firstly introduced in 2017 by [Vaswani et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762), that has drastically outperformed previous SoTA models for NLP tasks, based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), that the scientific community believed were dead after that paper. 

Reviewer 4: I find this paragraph a bit too long-winded. How about something like this?

```suggestion
The rise of these powerful models stems from the democratization and widespread adoption of transformer-based models, first introduced by Vaswani et al. in 2017. These models significantly outperformed previous SoTA NLP models based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which were considered dead after that paper.
```

Author: Awesome!

> Through this blogpost, we will introduce the integration of a new architecture, RWKV, that combines the advantages of both RNNs and transformers, and that has been recently integrated into the HuggingFace [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) library.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Through this blogpost, we will introduce the integration of a new architecture, RWKV, that combines the advantages of both RNNs and transformers, and that has been recently integrated into the Hugging Face [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) library.
```

### Overview of the RWKV project

> The RWKV project has been kicked off and led by [Bo Peng](https://github.com/BlinkDL), who is actively contributing and maintaining the project. There is a community that is constantly enhancing the project’s artifacts in the official discord channel on various topics such as performance (RWKV.cpp, quantization, etc.), scalability (dataset processing & scrapping) and research (chat-fine tuning, multi-modal finetuning, etc.). The GPU access for training RWKV models are donated by Stability AI.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The RWKV project was kicked off and is being led by [Bo Peng](https://github.com/BlinkDL), who is actively contributing and maintaining the project. The community, organized in the official discord channel, is constantly enhancing the project’s artifacts on various topics such as performance (RWKV.cpp, quantization, etc.), scalability (dataset processing & scrapping) and research (chat-fine tuning, multi-modal finetuning, etc.). The GPUs for training RWKV models are donated by Stability AI.
```

> Learn more about that by joining the [official discord channel](https://discordapp.com/users/468093332535640064) and learn more about the general ideas behind RWKV in these two blogposts: https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html / https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can get involved by joining the [official discord channel](https://discordapp.com/users/468093332535640064) and learn more about the general ideas behind RWKV in these two blogposts: https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html / https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html 
```

A RNN can be also used in different “modes”, therefore enabling the possibility of applying RNNs on different scenarios, as denoted by [Andrej Karpathy’s blogpost](https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/), such as one-to-one (image-classification), one-to-many (image captioning), many-to-one (sequence classification), many-to-many (sequence generation), etc.

| ![rnn_diagram](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RNN-scheme.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>Overview of possible configurations of using RNNs. Source: <a href="https://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-effectiveness/" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >Andrej Karpathy's blogpost</a>  </b>|

Because RNNs use the same weights to compute predictions at every step, they struggle to memorize information for long-range sequences due to the vanishing gradient issue. Efforts have been made to address this limitation by introducing new architectures such as LSTMs or GRUs. However, the transformer architecture proved to be the most effective thus far in resolving this issue.

> In the transformer architecture, the input tokens are processed in the self-attention module simultaneously. The tokens are first linearly projected into different spaces using the query, key and value weights. The resulting matrices are directly used to compute the attention scores (through softmax, as shown below), then multiplied by the value hidden states to obtain the final hidden states. This design enables the architecture to effectively mitigate the long-range sequence issue, and also perform faster inference and training compared to RNN models. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the transformer architecture, the input tokens are processed simultaneously in the self-attention module. The tokens are first linearly projected into different spaces using the query, key and value weights. The resulting matrices are directly used to compute the attention scores (through softmax, as shown below), then multiplied by the value hidden states to obtain the final hidden states. This design enables the architecture to effectively mitigate the long-range sequence issue, and also perform faster inference and training compared to RNN models. 
```

## The RWKV architecture

RWKV is inspired by [Apple’s Attention Free Transformer](https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/attention-free-transformer). The architecture has been carefully simplified and optimized such that it can be transformed into an RNN. In addition, a number of tricks has been added such as `TokenShift` & `SmallInitEmb` (the list of tricks is listed in [the README of the official GitHub repository](https://github.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/blob/main/README.md#how-it-works)) to boost its performance to match GPT. Without these, the model wouldn't be as performant.
For training, there is an infrastructure to scale the training up to 14B parameters as of now, and some issues have been iteratively fixed in RWKV-4 (latest version as of today), such as numerical instability.

### RWKV as a combination of RNNs and transformers

How to combine the best of transformers and RNNs? The main drawback of transformer-based models is that it can become challenging to run a model with a context window that is larger than a certain value, as the attention scores are computed simultaneously for the entire sequence. 

> RNNs natively support very long context lengths - only limited by the context length seen in training, but this can be extended to millions of tokens with careful coding. Currently, there are RWKV models trained on a context length of 8192 (`ctx8192`) and they are as fast as `ctx1024` models and consume the same amount of VRAM.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RNNs natively support very long context lengths - only limited by the context length seen in training, but this can be extended to millions of tokens with careful coding. Currently, there are RWKV models trained on a context length of 8192 (`ctx8192`) and they are as fast as `ctx1024` models and require the same amount of RAM.
```

The major drawbacks of traditional RNN models and how RWKV is different:

1. Traditional RNN models are unable to utilize very long contexts (LSTM can only manage ~100 tokens when used as a LM). However, RWKV can utilize thousands of tokens and beyond, as shown below: 

| ![rwkv_loss](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV-loss.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>LM loss with respect to different context lengths and model sizes. Source: <a href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/BlinkDL/RWKV-LM/main/RWKV-ctxlen.png" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >RWKV original repository</a>  </b>|

2. Traditional RNN models cannot be parallelized when training. RWKV is similar to a “linearized GPT” and it trains faster than GPT.

> By combining both these advantages into a single architecture, the hope is that RWKV can grow to become more than the sum of its parts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By combining both advantages into a single architecture, the hope is that RWKV can grow to become more than the sum of its parts.
```

Reviewer 4: Would be awesome to have a subjective assessment about whether this has been achieved :)

To gain a more comprehensive understanding of the attention layer, we recommend to delve into the detailed explanation provided in [a blog post by Johan Sokrates Wind](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_details.html).

### Existing checkpoints

#### Pure language models: RWKV-4 models

Most adopted RWKV models range from ~170M parameters to 14B parameters. According to the RWKV overview [blog post](https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html), these models have been trained on the Pile dataset and evaluated against other SoTA models on different benchmarks, and they seem to perform quite well, with very comparable results against them.

| ![rwkv_loss](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV-eval.png) |
|:--:|
| <b>RWKV-4 compared to other common architectures. Source: <a href="https://johanwind.github.io/2023/03/23/rwkv_overview.html" rel="noopener" target="_blank" >Johan Wind's blogpost</a>  </b>|

#### Instruction Fine-tuned/Chat Version: RWKV-4 Raven

> Bo has also trained a “chat” version of the RWKV architecture, the RWKV-4 Raven model. It is a RWKV-4 pile (RWKV model pretrained on The Pile dataset) model fine-tuned on ALPACA, CodeAlpaca, Guanaco, GPT4All, ShareGPT and more. The model is available in multiple versions, with models trained on different languages (English only, English + Chinese + Japanese, English + Japanese, etc.) and different sizes (1.5B parameters, 7B parameters, 14B parameters). 

Reviewer 4: Isn't it a bit weird that Bo is an author and referred to in the third person here? How about just using "we"?

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_id)

question = "Tell me about ravens"
prompt = f"### Instruction: {question}\n### Response:"

inputs = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt").to(0)
output = model.generate(inputs["input_ids"], max_new_tokens=100)

print(tokenizer.decode(output[0].tolist(), skip_special_tokens=True))
>>> ### Instruction: Tell me about ravens
### Response: RAVENS are a type of bird that is native to the Middle East and North Africa. They are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments. RAVENS are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments. They are known for their intelligence, adaptability, and their ability to live in a variety of environments.
```

According to Bo, better instruction techniques are detailed in [this discord message (make sure to join the channel before clicking)](https://discord.com/channels/992359628979568762/1083107245971226685/1098533896355848283)

| ![discord_message](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/142_rwkv/RWKV%20instructions.png) |

### Weights conversion

> Any user could easily convert the original RWKV weights to the HF format by simply running the conversion script provided in `transformers` library. First, push the "raw" weights on the Hugging Face Hub (let's denote that repo as `RAW_HUB_REPO`, and the raw file `RAW_FILE`), then run the conversion script:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Any user could easily convert the original RWKV weights to the HF format by simply running the conversion script provided in the `transformers` library. First, push the "raw" weights to the Hugging Face Hub (let's denote that repo as `RAW_HUB_REPO`, and the raw file `RAW_FILE`), then run the conversion script:
```

> Any user could easily convert the original RWKV weights to the HF format by simply running the conversion script provided in `transformers` library. First, push the "raw" weights on the Hugging Face Hub (let's denote that repo as `RAW_HUB_REPO`, and the raw file `RAW_FILE`), then run the conversion script:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Any user could easily convert the original RWKV weights to the HF format by simply running the conversion script provided in the `transformers` library. First, push the "raw" weights to the Hugging Face Hub (let's denote that repo as `RAW_HUB_REPO`, and the raw file `RAW_FILE`), then run the conversion script:
```

RWKV can also benefit from the acceleration techniques proposed by [`optimum`](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum) library in the near future.
Some of these techniques are highlighted in the [`rwkv.cpp` repository](https://github.com/saharNooby/rwkv.cpp) or [`rwkv-cpp-cuda` repository](https://github.com/harrisonvanderbyl/rwkv-cpp-cuda).

## Acknowledgements

The Hugging Face team would like to thank Bo and RWKV community for their time and for answering our questions about the architecture. We would also like to thank them for their help and support and we look forward to see more adoption of RWKV models in the HF ecosystem.
We also would like to acknowledge the work of [Johan Wind](https://twitter.com/johanwind) for his blogpost on RWKV, which helped us a lot to understand the architecture and its potential.
And finally, we would like to highlight anf acknowledge the work of [ArEnSc](https://github.com/ArEnSc) for starting over the initial `transformers` PR.

> Also big kudos to [Merve Noyan](https://huggingface.co/merve), [Maria Khalusova](https://huggingface.co/MariaK) and [Pedro Cuenca](https://huggingface.co/pcuenq) for kindly reviwing this blogpost to make it much better!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also big kudos to [Merve Noyan](https://huggingface.co/merve), [Maria Khalusova](https://huggingface.co/MariaK) and [Pedro Cuenca](https://huggingface.co/pcuenq) for kindly reviewing this blogpost to make it much better!
```

lol, thanks for the mention ❤️

Author: Sure thing!
